modify spack develop (#888)
ACCESS-NRI/access-hive.org.au: docs/models/run-a-model/build_a_model.md

{% set esm1_5_build_config = "https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/ACCESS-ESM1.5" %}
{% set spack_setup = "/getting_started/spack" %}
[gadi]: https://opus.nci.org.au/display/Help/0.+Welcome+to+Gadi#id-0.WelcometoGadi-Overview
[spack-configuration-scopes-documentation]: https://spack.readthedocs.io/en/latest/configuration.html#configuration-scopes

> # Build or modify an ACCESS model's source code

Author: Changed to `Modify and build an ACCESS model's source code` in [dc9611bd2a4df0ac9d00bdea4bb3da6951bf1fc0](https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/access-hive.org.au/pull/888/commits/dc9611bd2a4df0ac9d00bdea4bb3da6951bf1fc0)

!!! info
    The source code is automatically cloned in the [environment's folder](#spack-environment-folder).<br><br>
    The repository URL is set within the package definition file `package.py`.<br>
    In the case of _mom5_, the package definition file is in `spack-packages/packages/mom5/package.py`.<br>
    For more information about _Spack_ packages definition, please refer to [Creating new spack packages](https://spack.readthedocs.io/en/latest/packaging_guide.html#creating-new-packages).

#### Specify the source code from a local folder {: id='local-package'}
To set a local path as the source code of a _Spack_ development package, the path needs to be specified directly within the `spack develop` command, by adding the `--path <path_to_source_code>` option.
In this case, no _git_ reference should be provided.<br>
For example, if the _mom5_ development package's source code resides in `/path/to/mom5/new/source/code`, the command to run would be:
```
develop:
    mom5:
      spec: mom5@git.access-esm1.5_2024.08.23=access-esm1.5
spack develop --path /path/to/mom5/new/source/code mom5
```

> The source code is automatically copied inside the [environment's folder](#spack-environment-folder).

Reviewer: I think I'd like to keep this line in if possible? See [discussion here](https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/access-hive.org.au/issues/845#issuecomment-2712559462). Caveat: I haven't looked at the broader context!

Author: That portion was deleted, but a similar concept was introduced in the re-structured version, under [Specify the source code cloned from a git repository](https://access-hive.org.au/pr-preview/pr-888/models/run-a-model/build_a_model/#remote-package)

When you develop a package within a _Spack_ environment, _Spack_ needs to know that the desired package is marked as "in development", and be able to access its source code.<br>
This is done through the [`spack develop`](https://spack.readthedocs.io/en/latest/command_index.html#spack-develop) command.

To mark a package as a development package, the general command to run is:
```
spack develop <package_specifier>
```
!!! tip
    This command should not display any output

> When specifying a _Spack_ development package, there are 3 portions that can be set within the `package_specifier`:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When specifying a _Spack_ development package, there are 3 attributes that can be set within the `package_specifier`:
```

Author: I don't really like "attributes". 
"Attribute" could have other meanings (also within the programming space) that might confuse readers.

If you don't like "portions", what about one of these options?
- elements
- parts

Reviewer 2: Let's go with `elements`. Then change the `Specifying the package name` to `Specifying the package name element`.

Author: Addressed in [323c48cb72a76e5e564f98f0ac4f67f09d28068d](https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/access-hive.org.au/pull/888/commits/323c48cb72a76e5e564f98f0ac4f67f09d28068d)

1. [package name](#package-name) (required)
2. [package source code](#package-source-code) (required)
3. [package _Spack_ version](#spack-version) (optional)

The `spack develop` command adds the following lines at the end of the `spack.yaml` file inside the [environment's folder](#spack-environment-folder):
```
develop:
    <package_name>:
      spec: <package_specifier>
```

!!! info
    In the case of a development package with a [local source code](#local-package), the following line is also added:
    ```
    path: <source_path>
    ```

!!! warning
    After setting a development package, it is important to also [fix any inconsistencies within the `spack.yaml` file](#fix-inconsistencies-within-the-environment-file).

> ### Specifying the package name {: id='package-name'}

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Specifying the package name attribute {: id='package-name'}
```

Author: Addressed in [323c48cb72a76e5e564f98f0ac4f67f09d28068d](https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/access-hive.org.au/pull/888/commits/323c48cb72a76e5e564f98f0ac4f67f09d28068d)

The package name identifies the package to be set for development.<br>
For example, in the case of _mom5_, the package name should be exactly `mom5`.

> ### Specifying the package source code {: id='package-source-code'}

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Specifying the package source code attribute {: id='package-source-code'}
```

!!! info
    The source code is automatically cloned in the [environment's folder](#spack-environment-folder).<br><br>
    The repository URL is set within the package definition file `package.py`.<br>
    In the case of _mom5_, the package definition file is in `spack-packages/packages/mom5/package.py`.<br>
    For more information about _Spack_ packages definition, please refer to [Creating new spack packages](https://spack.readthedocs.io/en/latest/packaging_guide.html#creating-new-packages).

#### Specify the source code from a local folder {: id='local-package'}
To set a local path as the source code of a _Spack_ development package, the path needs to be specified directly within the `spack develop` command, by adding the `--path <path_to_source_code>` option.
In this case, no _git_ reference should be provided.<br>
For example, if the _mom5_ development package's source code resides in `/path/to/mom5/new/source/code`, the command to run would be:
```
spack develop --path /path/to/mom5/new/source/code mom5
```

> Optionally, and usually recommended, a [_Spack_ version](#spack-version-local-package) can be also specified.

Reviewer 2: Can this sentence be deleted or reworded?

Author: Addressed in [c647e2b6cdffb39b5ae7028e6f89eeb6747612fa](https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/access-hive.org.au/pull/888/commits/c647e2b6cdffb39b5ae7028e6f89eeb6747612fa)

!!! warning
    Care needs to be taken when multiple _Spack_ development environments point to the same source code location. If these environments require different independent changes of the source code, the user needs to make sure to sync the source code version (e.g., using different `git` branches for the different versions of the source code) with the desired one when switching between development environments.<br>
    This would still prevent building both environments simultaneously.

> ### Specify the package version {: id='spack-version'}

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Specify the package Spack version attribute {: id='spack-version'}
```

Author: Addressed in [323c48cb72a76e5e564f98f0ac4f67f09d28068d](https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/access-hive.org.au/pull/888/commits/323c48cb72a76e5e564f98f0ac4f67f09d28068d)
Changed to `element`

A version specifier can optionally be set, assiging the specified _Spack_ version to the development package.<br>
The syntax for the version specifier varies depending whether the package source code is [remote](#spack-version-remote-package) or [local](#spack-version-local-package).

> #### Specify the package version for a remote package {: id='spack-version-remote-package'}

Author: Addressed in [323c48cb72a76e5e564f98f0ac4f67f09d28068d](https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/access-hive.org.au/pull/888/commits/323c48cb72a76e5e564f98f0ac4f67f09d28068d)

If the development package's source code is to be cloned from _git_, the _Spack_ version can be set by appending `=<package_version>` to the package specifier.<br>

> For example, to set the `access-om2` _Spack_ version to the _mom5_ development package with its source code cloned from the `development` branch, we can run:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For example, to develop mom5 code from the `development` branch and build it as Spack version `access-om2`, run:
```

Author: Addressed in [323c48cb72a76e5e564f98f0ac4f67f09d28068d](https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/access-hive.org.au/pull/888/commits/323c48cb72a76e5e564f98f0ac4f67f09d28068d)

```
spack develop mom5@git.development=access-om2
```

> #### Specify the package version for a local package {: id='spack-version-local-package'}

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### Specify the package version for a local package source {: id='spack-version-local-package'}
```

Author: Addressed in [323c48cb72a76e5e564f98f0ac4f67f09d28068d](https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/access-hive.org.au/pull/888/commits/323c48cb72a76e5e564f98f0ac4f67f09d28068d)

When the development package's source code is local, no _git_ reference is provided.<br>

> In this case a _Spack_ version can be added by appending `@<spack_version>` to the package specifier.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this case a _Spack_ version can be added by appending `@<package_version>` to the package specifier.
```

Author: Addressed in [323c48cb72a76e5e564f98f0ac4f67f09d28068d](https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/access-hive.org.au/pull/888/commits/323c48cb72a76e5e564f98f0ac4f67f09d28068d)

```
spack develop --path /path/to/mom5/new/source/code mom5@access-om2
```
!!! tip
    When in doubt about which versions to assign to a specific package, a useful command to retrieve the existing versions of a package is:
    ```
    spack versions <package_name>
    ```

!!! warning
    _Spack_ always needs to associate a _Spack_ version with a development package. This means that, if no _Spack_ version is specified by the user:
    
    - If the package has a _git_ reference, the _Spack_ version will be taken from the closest valid _git_ tag among ancestors of the _git_ reference
    - If the package source code is local, an error will be thrown

## Fix inconsistencies within the environment file
At times, setting development packages might cause inconsistencies within the `spack.yaml` environment file.<br>
This occurs whenever an environment contains a required package with the same name as the development package.

For example, the `mom5_dev` environment `spack.yaml` file contains the following lines:

> ```yaml
> ```yaml

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```yaml
```
